Blog on What's new in Network Observability 1.6 (#71)
netobserv/documents: blogs/whats_new_1.6/index.md

# What's new in Network Observability 1.6

Network Observability 1.6 was released on June 17, 2024.  Even though this is considered a minor version upgrade from 1.5, it is a significant release that could lower the barrier to adoption into production.

> But before we go further, for those of you new to Network Observability, NetObserv, for short, is an optional operator that provides a slew of capabilities to track and provide insight into your network traffic flows.  While it works on any Kubernetes cluster, it works even better in an OpenShift environment, which is what I will focus on in this article.  I will only discuss the new features in this release so if you want the full feature list, read the documentation on [About Network Observability](https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.16/observability/network_observability/json-flows-format-reference.html).

Reviewer: wrong link I guess:

```suggestion
But before we go further, for those of you new to Network Observability, NetObserv, for short, is an optional operator that provides a slew of capabilities to track and provide insight into your network traffic flows.  While it works on any Kubernetes cluster, it works even better in an OpenShift environment, which is what I will focus on in this article.  I will only discuss the new features in this release so if you want the full feature list, read the documentation on [About Network Observability](https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.16/observability/network_observability/network-observability-overview.html).
```

## Graphs and Logs Without Loki and Storage

Let's get right to the crux of the issue.  Prior to 1.4, NetObserv required an external component called Loki as well as storage, such as an S3 bucket, to store logs.  These flow logs allowed NetObserv to provide a rich UI to display graphs, tables, and a topology.  The resources required by Loki can be significant, particularly if you have lots of traffic and are sampling all data, not to mention the storage required.  In 1.4 and 1.5, if you have your own observability platform and only need the flow logs data, you can simply export this data and not install Loki or provide storage.  When you do this, you essentially get no UI besides some minimal flow metrics in **Observe > Dashboards**, because the expectation is that your platform will provide the features and the visuals.

> This release changes that premise.  It brings back the graphs in the **Overview** panel and the topology in the **Topology** panel.  This is huge because the core of Network Observability is now fully functional at a fraction of the resources required when Loki is used!  It achieves this by creating Prometheus metrics from the flows and storing them at 5-minute intervals.

Reviewer: Scrape interval is actually configured to 15 seconds: https://github.com/netobserv/network-observability-operator/blob/main/controllers/flp/flp_common_objects.go#L445

```suggestion
This release changes that premise.  It brings back the graphs in the **Overview** panel and the topology in the **Topology** panel.  This is huge because the core of Network Observability is now fully functional at a fraction of the resources required when Loki is used!  It achieves this by creating Prometheus metrics from the flows and storing them at 15-seconds intervals.
```

### eBPF Agent metrics

You can view statistics for eBPF Agent.  This is in Web console under **Observe > Dashboards**.  Select **NetObserv / Health** in the Dashboard dropdown (Figure 5).  There are graphs for eviction rates, dropped flow rates, and more.

![eBPF Agent statistics](images/ebpf_agent_statistics.png)
_<div style="text-align: center">Figure 5: eBPF Agent statistics</div>_

### Other eBPF changes

Here are a few other minor eBPF changes.

1. Option to alert if it's dropping flows<br>
There is a new option in FlowCollector to control whether an alert is shown if it's dropping flows (Figure 6).  By default, this is enabled.

![Disable alerts](images/ebpf_metrics_configuration.png)
_<div style="text-align: center">Figure 6: eBPF Agent configuration - Disable alerts</div>_

2. Use enhanced TCx hook<br>
Internally, the eBPF Agent uses the Traffic Control (TC) hook to probe the ingress and egress traffic on the interfaces.  In OCP 4.16, which upgrades RHEL to 9.4, it can leverage the enhanced TCx hook for performance gains.

3. Always save DNS flags<br>

> If the *DNSTracking* feature is enabled, regardless of the sampling setting, it always saves the DNS id and flags.  Previously, it would discard this data if the flow didn't exist.

Reviewer: It's not exactly this. It's that, to compute DNS latency, you need to catch the request and the response - it this is quite unlikely to happen as soon as you have sampling >1, you need some luck to capture both the request and the response. Previously, it was all or nothing: we were either writing all the DNS stats, or none, tying error codes & id with the availability of the latency. Now we still write codes & id event if we don't have the latency. It's still tied to the sampling config, ie. unsampled flows won't get their DNS stats, but you don't need anymore to have both the request and the response sampled.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Previously, with the *DNSTracking* feature enabled, it was unlikely to generate DNS statistics as soon as sampling was configured greater than 1, because the probe was expecting to catch both the request and the response. This had been changed so that it always saves the DNS id and flags. Only the DNS latency remains unlikely to have with high sampling configured.
```

![Not 'ip' filter](images/not_ip_filter.png)
_<div style="text-align: center">Figure 7: Not 'ip' filter</div>_

2. De-duplication of flows<br>
    When a flow is a duplicate on another interface, instead of saving multiple copies of that flow data, only one is stored now.  It keeps track of the list of interfaces that refer to the flow data.  This greatly reduces the amount of storage.

    The raw JSON fields have been renamed and pluralized to `Interfaces` and `IfDirections`, since the type changed to a list from a single value.  Note the use of square brackets for the lists below.

    ```
      "IfDirections": [
        0
      ],
      "Interfaces": [
        "br-ex"
      ],
    ```

3. Subnet labels<br>
    You can define a list of names for CIDRs (IP ranges and/or hosts).  When the CIDR matches, the name appears in the flow data as the `SrcSubnetLabel` or `DestSubnetLabel` field.

    YAML Example:

    ```
      processor:
        subnetLabels:
          customLabels:
          - cidrs:
            - 10.129.0.73/32  # provide a name for this host
            name: querier

>           openShiftAutoDetect: false

Reviewer: As said in the bug you reported ( https://issues.redhat.com/browse/NETOBSERV-1734 ) I don't see why you need to disable the auto-detect. If it's because the CIDR that you defined is in the cluster subnets, hence overlapping with the the auto-detected ones, maybe you could use a different example, with a cluster-external workload?

Author: Changed to use an external cidr example.

    ```

    If you don't want to define names, you can enable the OpenShift auto-detect mode to identify the items as "Pods", "Services", "Machines" or "n/a" (not applicable).  You configure this in the Processor section of Flow Collector (Figure 8).

![Subnet labels configuration](images/subnet_labels_configuration.png)
    _<div style="text-align: center">Figure 8: Subnet labels configuration</div>_

   Figure 9 shows the subnet label columns in the Traffic flow table when OpenShift auto-detect is enabled.

![Subnet labels columns](images/subnet_labels_columns.png)
    _<div style="text-align: center">Figure 9: Subnet labels columns</div>_

> 

Reviewer: you can also mention that this subnet feature provides a reliable way to identify cluster-external traffic, by matching anything that is not labelled.

Also, we may give some good practice here, for instance if users want to label their own external workloads, they could use a common prefix for the labels such as "Ext_" (e.g. Ext_MySQL, Ext_S3), so that they can easily count that in external traffic, for instance in promQL:

```
# All cluster-egress:
sum(rate(netobserv_workload_egress_bytes_total{DstSubnetLabel=~"|Ext_.*"}[1m]))
# Same, by configured labelled:
sum(rate(netobserv_workload_egress_bytes_total{DstSubnetLabel=~"|Ext_.*"}[1m])) by (DstSubnetLabel)
```

(this is assuming `workload_egress_bytes_total` metrics has been enabled in `processor.metrics.includeList`)

![Capture d’écran du 2024-06-28 09-53-08](https://github.com/netobserv/documents/assets/2153442/41b303c3-2b34-46c4-a639-820e0e716315)

## Custom Metrics

In my [Network Observability 1.5 blog](https://developers.redhat.com/articles/2024/03/20/whats-new-network-observability-15), I covered the development preview of the FlowMetrics API.  While it's possible to take any [flow data labels](https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.16/network_observability/json-flows-format-reference.html) and turn it into a Prometheus metric, that web page was updated to indicate which fields can be safely used as labels to avoid high cardinality.

This feature is now GA, and includes more filtering options (see [reference](https://github.com/netobserv/network-observability-operator/blob/main/docs/FlowMetric.md)) and support for [dashboards in OpenShift](https://github.com/netobserv/network-observability-operator/blob/main/docs/Metrics.md#charts-openshift-only).  That link also has many more examples of using custom metrics.

## Network Observability CLI

> This release has yet another significant technical preview feature called Network Observability CLI (NetObserv CLI).  It is a kubectl plug-in that effectively installs Network Observability from the command line but is text-based only.  When you exit the program, it cleans up and removes itself.  In other words, you can now run Network Observability on-demand!

Reviewer: > It is a kubectl plug-in that effectively installs Network Observability from the command line but is text-based only.

You may add it's only some netobserv components but not all / not the operator? People may think it's an alternative way of installing the operator

# What's new in Network Observability 1.6

Network Observability 1.6 was released on June 17, 2024.  Even though this is considered a minor version upgrade from 1.5, it is a significant release that could lower the barrier to adoption into production.

> But before we go further, for those of you new to Network Observability, NetObserv, for short, is an optional operator that provides a slew of capabilities to track and provide insight into your network traffic flows.  While it works on any Kubernetes cluster, it works even better in an OpenShift environment, which is what I will focus on in this article.  I will only discuss the new features in this release so if you want the full feature list, read the documentation on [About Network Observability](https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.16/observability/network_observability/network-observability-overview.html).

Reviewer 2: should we still say that netobserv is an operator or start saying that it's a set of tools ? :upside_down_face:

Author: Good suggestion!

Author: I'm going to leave it as operator and then when Network Observability CLI becomes GA, let's revisit!

![Traffic flows grayed out](images/traffic_flows-grayed_out.png)
_<div style="text-align: center">Figure 1: Traffic flows grayed out</div>_

The other point to understand is that the metrics don't have information at the pod level so for example, in the topology, the **Resource** scope, which shows the pod to pod/service communication, will not exist (Figure 2).

![Topology](images/topology-no_resources.png)
_<div style="text-align: center">Figure 2: Topology - No "Resources"</div>_

A couple of other features, namely packet drop reason and multi-tenancy, are not supported but will be addressed in a follow on release.  If you need any of these capabilities, then go ahead and install Loki and provide storage as usual.

Let's walk through how to configure a Loki-less setup.  Install the Network Observability Operator.  In **Operators > Installed Operators**, click the **Flow Collector** link, and then **Create FlowCollector**.  Click **Loki client settings** to open this up (Figure 3).

![Loki client settings](images/flp-loki_client_settings.png)
_<div style="text-align: center">Figure 3: Loki client settings</div>_

> By default, Loki is enabled so set **Enable** to false.  That's it!

Reviewer 3: And btw we missed this in product docs @jotak , so I'm going to open a docs bug to add it 🙃

> There is one other note worth mentioning.  Even if you do install Loki, by default, it will favor using the metrics instead of Loki for querying whenever possible.  By doing this, not only will it be faster, but it will be possible to query data over a period of weeks or months.  This behavior can be changed under **Prometheus**, **Querier** in the **Enable** setting (Figure 4).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
There is one other note worth mentioning.  Even if you do install Loki, by default, the Network Observability Operator favors using the metrics instead of Loki for querying whenever possible.  By doing this, not only is the Operator experience faster, but it is also possible to query data over a period of weeks or months.  This behavior is configurable in the **Prometheus**, **Querier** in the **Enable** setting (Figure 4).
```

Reviewer 3: A few suggestions to update the future tense to present tense. Additionally, I think "it" needs to be clarified to "Network Observability Operator".

Author: It's not the Network Observability Operator that's doing this; it's technically the NetObserv console plugin, but I rather not say that.  The point is that in the Overview panel and Topology, it favors using metrics instead of Loki.

Reviewer 3: Understood, and that makes sense. Thank you!

![Prometheus settings](images/flp-prometheus.png)
_<div style="text-align: center">Figure 4: Prometheus settings</div>_

## eBPF Agent Enhancements

The eBPF Agent probes the network interfaces and generates flows when it sees network traffic.  There were a number of eBPF Agent enhancements made.  Let's go through them one-by-one.

### Deploy on specific nodes

> By default, the eBPF Agent is deployed on each node using a DaemonSet.  If you know for sure that you do not need to run it on all nodes, you can control which nodes to deploy it on.  This is actually a [Kubernetes feature](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/assign-pod-node/) in the scheduler that is now implemented in the eBPF Agent.  There are many ways to do this, and the following uses node affinity to deploy the eBPF Agent only on pods with a specific label.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
By default, the eBPF Agent is deployed on each node using a DaemonSet.  If you know for sure that you do not need to run it on all nodes, you can control which nodes to deploy it on.  This is actually a [Kubernetes feature](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/assign-pod-node/) in the scheduler that is now implemented in the eBPF Agent.  There are many ways to do this, and the following method uses node affinity to deploy the eBPF Agent only on pods with a specific label.
```

```
  agent:
    ebpf:
      advanced:
        scheduling:
          affinity:
            nodeAffinity:
              requiredDuringSchedulingIgnoredDuringExecution:
                nodeSelectorTerms:
                - matchExpressions:
                  - key: ebpf-agent
                    operator: In
                    values:
                    - "true"  # make sure this has quotes
```

If you have **oc** installed on your computer, enter `oc edit flowcollector -n netobserv-privileged`.  Look for the `ebpf` section and add the lines above starting at `advanced`.  You can also do this in Web console.  Go to **Operators > Installed Operators**.  Look for the **Network Observability** row, click the **Flow Collector** link and then the **cluster** link.  Because this is an advanced feature, it is not in Form view, so click the **YAML** tab to edit the manifest.

> Now this will only deploy on nodes with the `ebpf-agent=true` label.  Set this label by replacing *node-name* with your node name below.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Now this only deploys on nodes with the `ebpf-agent=true` label.  Set this label by replacing *node-name* with your node name below.
```

```
oc label nodes node-name ebpf-agent=true
```

### Flow filter at eBPF level

Network Observability always had great filtering capability in the **Network Traffic** panel.  However, that is done at the UI level, meaning the flows are still generated and stored, and hence resources are being consumed.  If resources are a major concern, consider this feature ***if*** the filtering fits your requirements.

If you want to generate flows (or not generate flows) for very specific data, you can specify a single filter to do this.  Here's an example to only generate flows for network traffic on TCP port 6443.

```
  agent:
    ebpf:
      flowFilter:
        enable: true
        action: Accept
        cidr: 0.0.0.0/0  # refers to any traffic
        ports: 6443
        protocol: TCP
```

> Enter `oc edit flowcollector`.  Again, look for the `ebpf` section and add the rest of the lines starting at `flowFilter`.  The `cidr` specifies a network address and prefix.  The example refers to any traffic, but for a specific network, use something like 10.0.62.0/24.  The feature is limited to one filter and many of the attributes can only have one value.  For more details, see the [flowFilter reference](https://github.com/netobserv/network-observability-operator/blob/main/docs/flowcollector-flows-netobserv-io-v1beta2.adoc#specagentebpfflowfilter).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Enter `oc edit flowcollector`.  Again, look for the `ebpf` section and add the rest of the lines starting at `flowFilter`.  The `cidr` specifies a network address and prefix.  The example refers to any traffic, but for a specific network, use a value like `10.0.62.0/24`.  The feature is limited to one filter and many of the attributes can only have one value.  For more details, see the [flowFilter reference](https://github.com/netobserv/network-observability-operator/blob/main/docs/flowcollector-flows-netobserv-io-v1beta2.adoc#specagentebpfflowfilter).
```

Reviewer 3: The backticks emphasize this value a little more. Wdyt?

### eBPF Agent metrics

You can view statistics for eBPF Agent.  This is in Web console under **Observe > Dashboards**.  Select **NetObserv / Health** in the Dashboard dropdown (Figure 5).  There are graphs for eviction rates, dropped flow rates, and more.

![eBPF Agent statistics](images/ebpf_agent_statistics.png)
_<div style="text-align: center">Figure 5: eBPF Agent statistics</div>_

### Other eBPF changes

Here are a few other minor eBPF changes.

1. Option to alert if it's dropping flows<br>

> There is a new option in FlowCollector to control whether an alert is shown if it's dropping flows (Figure 6).  By default, this is enabled.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
There is a new option in  the FlowCollector to control whether an alert is shown if it's dropping flows (Figure 6).  By default, this is enabled.
```

    ```

    Enter `oc edit flowcollector`.  Look for the `processor` section and add the rest of the lines starting at `subnetLabels`.  The Form view in Web console looks like Figure 8.

![Subnet labels configuration](images/subnet_labels_configuration.png)
    _<div style="text-align: center">Figure 8: Subnet labels configuration</div>_

   By default, the OpenShift auto-detect mode is enabled to identify internal CIDRs as "Pods", "Services", "Machines" or "n/a" for not applicable.  While CIDRs can be internal or external, they are typically external to allow you to provide a custom name for them.  If you use a naming convention such as prefixing "Ext_" for all cluster-external traffic, then you can create a custom metric for this.  Here's a PromQL that displays a graph of external traffic in bytes over a 1-minute period.

   ```
   sum(rate(netobserv_workload_egress_bytes_total{DstSubnetLabel=~"|Ext_.*"}[1m]))
   ```

   This assumes the `workload_egress_bytes_total` metric has been included in `processor.metrics.includeList`.  See my [Network Observability 1.5 blog](https://developers.redhat.com/articles/2024/03/20/whats-new-network-observability-15) on how to do this.

>    In the Traffic flow table, this is what you will see if you add the Subnet Label columns (Figure 9).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   In the Traffic flow table, this is what you see if you add the Subnet Label columns (Figure 9).
```

This feature is now GA, and includes more filtering options (see [reference](https://github.com/netobserv/network-observability-operator/blob/main/docs/FlowMetric.md)) and support for [dashboards in OpenShift](https://github.com/netobserv/network-observability-operator/blob/main/docs/Metrics.md#charts-openshift-only).  That link also has many more examples of using custom metrics.

## Network Observability CLI

This release has yet another significant technical preview feature called Network Observability CLI (NetObserv CLI).  It is a kubectl plug-in that effectively installs Network Observability from the command line but is text-based only.  When you exit the program, it cleans up and removes itself.  In other words, you can now run Network Observability on-demand!

> While it reuses much of the NetObserv code, it is separate from the Network Observability Operator.  This means even if you have NetObserv running, you can still run the NetObserv CLI independently.  For this preview, it only supports nodes running x64.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
While it reuses much of the NetObserv code, it is separate from the Network Observability Operator.  This means even if you have NetObserv running, you can still run the NetObserv CLI independently.  For this preview, it only supports nodes running `x86_64` architecture.
```

Reviewer 3: So, in the Red Hat Style Guide, we aren't supposed to refer to this as just x64: https://redhat-documentation.github.io/supplementary-style-guide/#x86_64

Up to you to take it or no.

It is also not just a subset of features of the Network Observability Operator.  There is an option to capture packets and save them in a pcap file to be used by a network analysis tool like Wireshark!  Here is a sample screenshot of NetObserv CLI that is filtering and displaying traffic on port 443 (Figure 10).

![netobserv_cli](images/netobserv_cli.png)
_<div style="text-align: center">Figure 10: Network Observability CLI</div>_

> To install this, download the [NetObserv CLI tar file](https://mirror.openshift.com/pub/openshift-v4/clients/netobserv/latest/netobserv-cli.tar.gz) and run the following commands:

Reviewer 2: If you don't want to manage the link here since it's not working yet, simply point the doc url
https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.16/observability/network_observability/netobserv_cli/netobserv-cli-install.html

Author: Good suggestion!
